Pillar 1: Niche & Expert Interview - Peter K.
Invited Dmitry Shishkin Peter Krauss
Attachments Pillar 1: Niche & Expert Interview - Peter K. 
Meeting records Transcript 

Summary
Dmitry Shishkin and Peter Krauss discussed the strategic importance of journalism niches, emphasizing the need for data-driven approaches to identify and develop them. They highlighted the necessity of a unified data foundation, cross-functional teams, and the use of advanced techniques like embeddings and AI to automate content discovery and personalization for future newsrooms. Key talking points included the importance of data in identifying what people read, structuring data departments for niche development, resolving conflicting data sources, and leveraging data for content exchange and automated experiences.

Details
Niches in Journalism Dmitry Shishkin initiated a discussion on journalism niches, emphasizing their role in enabling original journalism and the need for clarity on what is and isn't being covered. Peter Krauss added that a deeper understanding of existing content and desired content is crucial for niche development, citing the success of a "fame fighting" event that led to significant subscription sales. They highlighted the importance of data in identifying what people read and do not read, and discussed the lack of a fundamental approach to data as a blind spot for future success.
Identifying and Approaching Niches with Data Peter Krauss explained that from a technical data perspective, identifying a niche like travel involves comparing performance with competitors and using algorithmic recommendations to suggest content to editorial teams. Dmitry Shishkin inquired about approaching niche identification from an editorial perspective, suggesting that data should inform what kind of research and conversations are needed to identify a niche, especially when editorial teams express interest in specific areas (00:02:29). Peter Krauss added that even if internal data is lacking, insights can be gained by learning from others who have successfully established niches (00:04:32).
Structuring Data Departments for Niche Development Dmitry Shishkin questioned the optimal setup for a data department within an organization to support niche development, moving beyond traditional monthly or annual reporting to more daily and weekly insights (00:04:32). Peter Krauss advocated for cross-functional teams, highlighting that central data teams often lack the contextual knowledge to evaluate data accuracy (e.g., whether an article should have received more clicks or subscriptions). They emphasized the need for close input from individuals with contextual knowledge and the development of daily-use products for these teams, citing the success of having a "champion" like Meny Zaka, the deputy editor and chief from Bild, who was interested in understanding and utilizing data solutions (00:06:03).
{"transcript":"Oct 7, 2025\nPillar 3: AI-enabled Interview - Peter K.\nInvited Dmitry Shishkin Peter Krauss\nAttachments 
  Pillar 3: AI-enabled Interview - Peter K.\nMeeting records Transcript\n\nSummary\nPeter Krauss identified two transformative 
  applications of AI in the newsroom: automating news discovery to provide editors with relevant articles and automating content 
  curation and personalization to offer a \"Netflix experience\" in content consumption, which Dmitry Shishkin linked to user 
  needs. They discussed the challenges of AI-driven content quality, the importance of journalistic brands focusing on education 
  and trust amidst AI-generated content, and key data dependencies like hyper-personalization and understanding user engagement for
   successful AI implementation. Peter Krauss and Dmitry Shishkin also explored the feasibility of AI-generated news products, the 
  role of multimodality, strategies for journalistic efficiency, and innovative business models, emphasizing the need for 
  consistent data foundations across brands and the potential for content reutilization to support investigative 
  journalism.\n\nDetails\nNotes Length: Long\nTransformative AI Applications in the Newsroom: Peter Krauss identified two 
  transformative applications of AI in the newsroom. The first is the automation of news discovery, where AI can read the internet,
   sort content by relevance, and provide editors with a shortlist of 10 to 20 articles daily, indicating topics they should write 
  about. This approach drastically changed the way editors worked at AXA and Springer (00:00:00). The second is the automation of 
  content curation and personalization, addressing the issue of editors spending significant time deciding where to place articles.
   Peter Krauss noted that current digital newspapers still resemble printed versions, unlike platforms like Instagram or YouTube 
  where users see content tailored to their interests. Peter Krauss emphasized the need for a \"Netflix experience\" in content 
  consumption, combining curated content with a high degree of understanding of user preferences, which Dmitry Shishkin related to 
  user needs (00:01:36).\nChallenges and Quality in AI-driven Content: Dmitry Shishkin questioned the effectiveness of social media
   algorithms, noting that they often push content users are not interested in (00:01:36). Peter Krauss clarified that journalistic
   brands should not be compared to social media platforms, as social media often prioritizes engagement, which can lead to 
  clickbait or harassment. Peter Krauss stressed that journalistic brands have a responsibility to educate people and report on 
  world events while also needing to be profitable. Peter Krauss mentioned the \"need to know\" and \"want to know\" model from an 
  update, where essential information is presented prominently, followed by personalized content (00:02:39). Peter Krauss also 
  highlighted that multimodality, such as videos, needs to be considered, as younger generations are reading less (00:04:54).\nKey 
  Dependencies for AI Success from a Data Perspective: Peter Krauss, from a data perspective, identified several key dependencies 
  for successful AI implementation in newsrooms, including radical efficiency, hyper-personalization, and building new AI-driven 
  products. Peter Krauss stressed the necessity of understanding product mechanics, successful features driving user engagement, 
  and the specific content users seek for a given brand (00:04:54). Peter Krauss noted that while organizations are adept at 
  tracking user information, they are \"drowning in the flood of data\" and fail to grasp the bigger picture. Peter Krauss 
  emphasized the need to understand how revenue is generated and how traffic might be cannibalized within a page. Peter Krauss also
   underscored the importance of identifying engaging features that users are willing to pay for, such as subscriptions or logins, 
  and urged for a holistic view of the user funnel rather than fragmented departmental goals like subscription or advertisement 
  revenue (00:06:03).\nChallenges of User Understanding in News Media vs. Other Industries: Peter Krauss explained that 
  understanding users in news media is significantly harder compared to platforms like Netflix or Amazon, primarily because news 
  organizations often start from a \"cold start\" without knowing their users since they typically do not log in. Additionally, 
  content changes frequently, with a news article having a lifespan of around six hours, requiring a constant fresh start. This 
  rapid change is also reflected in how news organizations operate, with editors often not focusing on past performance but rather 
  on current events (00:08:24). Dmitry Shishkin added that more advanced editors understand the value of historical performance 
  data for effective daily commissioning (00:09:12).\nFeasibility of AI-Generated News Products and Trust: Peter Krauss stated that
   it is technically possible to build a news product without a newsroom or human journalists, although the current quality is 
  \"lousy.\" However, Peter Krauss predicted that within a year, the quality could be comparable to social media, attracting an 
  audience. Peter Krauss questioned whether this is the desired outcome, reiterating the journalistic brands role in educating 
  people and sharing opinions. Dmitry Shishkin then proposed that the key differentiator between human and AI newsrooms would be 
  trust (00:10:32). Peter Krauss concurred, predicting that the internet would be flooded with AI-generated content, making it 
  increasingly difficult to distinguish reality from fiction, thereby increasing the importance of trusted brands 
  (00:11:47).\nMultimodality and Content Generation: Peter Krauss emphasized the increasing ease of generating videos from data, 
  highlighting examples of existing news platforms that prioritize engagement over quality using automated video generation 
  (00:11:47). Dmitry Shishkin shared an anecdote about a German tabloid that desired a \"make me angry\" user need, showcasing the 
  diverse motivations behind content consumption (00:12:55). Peter Krauss noted that various brands use similar user needs models, 
  such as the BBCs \"know, understand, feel, and do\" framework, with customized wording (00:13:50).\nJournalistic Efficiency and 
  Newsroom Size Reduction: Dmitry Shishkin inquired about reducing newsroom operations by 30% while preserving quality and output. 
  Peter Krauss explained that while content creation is well-covered by current tools, the focus for efficiency should be on 
  automating \"monkey work\" processes such as sales acquisition and sending invoices, which are time-consuming and annoying 
  (00:15:12). Peter Krauss suggested starting a newsroom afresh, prioritizing the technical department, as seen at AXA, where the 
  newsroom was secondary to technical fulfillment. Peter Krauss proposed building a prototype system where editors receive 
  recommendations of the 10 most important things to focus on daily, allowing them to refine and distribute content 
  (00:16:40).\nInnovative Business Models and Content Strategy: Peter Krauss highlighted \"morning crunch\" as an interesting 
  business model where newsletters are generated based on a technical product that dictates what to write about. This model is 
  highly profitable due to targeted ads and high CPMs, with a small team serving a large user base (00:17:35). Dmitry Shishkin 
  proposed a strategy of compartmentalizing news into niches, with central technical and distribution provisions, allowing focus on
   original content while commodity news is automated (00:18:45). Peter Krauss also mentioned the value of recommendation systems 
  providing feedback to editors, such as identifying under-reported topics that users are interested in. Dmitry Shishkin elaborated
   on this, referring to editorial analytics tools that provide notifications and measure editor responsiveness to these insights 
  (00:19:50).\nEconomic and Idealistic Approaches to Journalistic Efficiency: Peter Krauss presented two ways to approach 
  journalistic efficiency derived from AI. The first is economic, leading to fewer people involved in content creation while 
  maintaining quality and output, resulting in cost reduction. The second, more idealistic approach, is to free up journalists to 
  spend more time on investigative journalism, which is difficult for AI agents to replicate and is often the source of major 
  stories that define a brands reputation (00:22:22). Peter Krauss gave an example of how traditional sports reporting by German 
  brands, involving stadium presence and direct interaction, cannot be automated without sacrificing quality. Dmitry Shishkin 
  observed that this presents a challenge for organizations traditionally reliant on scale, suggesting that only high-quality, 
  mission-driven organizations will thrive, while an \"avalanche\" of commodity content will cater to audiences seeking amusement 
  or outrage (00:23:47).\nImpact of LLMs and Future of News Media: Peter Krauss compared the advent of Large Language Models (LLMs)
   to the invention of the printing press, noting that they make content creation cheaper. Peter Krauss emphasized that this must 
  be reflected in how news media earns money, either through more content or higher prices for content, necessitating a change in 
  the entire operational model (00:26:22). Peter Krauss also reiterated the importance of automated content discovery and 
  prediction of content performance (00:27:39). Dmitry Shishkin sought advice for multi-country portfolio companies on data 
  consistency. Peter Krauss stressed that a consistent data foundation is crucial for building any data product, as inconsistencies
   in data naming or understanding can negate efforts. Peter Krauss recounted a past initiative at Springer to use a single data 
  lake across subsidiaries, which failed due to high effort and lack of value, as use cases like identifying job-seeking readers 
  from news content proved impossible (00:29:09).\nData Aggregation and Use Cases for Multiple Brands: Peter Krauss highlighted 
  that Palantir is being used to aggregate diverse data sources for different brands, stressing the need for an automated way to 
  ingest and aggregate data based on specific brand needs, as a centralized data foundation does not work across all brands 
  (00:31:16). Peter Krauss emphasized that the focus should be on identifying use cases that are consistent across all brands, such
   as automating the news discovery process, which is a universal need (00:32:28). Peter Krauss mentioned the increasing ease and 
  quality of generating videos and pictures using tools like Google Whisk, which needs to be reflected in news media strategies. 
  Dmitry Shishkin expressed concern about unique content and the potential for increased internet flooding with senseless content, 
  while acknowledging the value of multimodality for user experience, such as turning articles into podcasts 
  (00:33:40).\nMonetization and Content Reutilization: Peter Krauss argued that content should not be limited to one brand, 
  suggesting that it could be reused in different modalities, like YouTube videos, to generate revenue that supports investigative 
  journalism. Dmitry Shishkin agreed that existing content could be repackaged for different platforms. Peter Krauss explained that
   increased monetization is necessary to avoid decreasing quality or producing \"stupid things everyone else is doing\" 
  (00:35:49). Peter Krauss envisioned a future where subscription-based investigative articles are complemented by automated video 
  reels on platforms like YouTube, effectively turning content distribution into an AI-driven process.\n\nSuggested next 
  steps\nPeter Krauss will share the changed wording of the user needs model with Dmitry Shishkin.\nPeter Krauss will stress the 
  point about discovery at the editorial summit.\n\nYou should review Geminis notes to make sure theyre accurate. Get tips and 
  learn how Gemini takes notes\nPlease provide feedback about using Gemini to take notes in a short survey."}'